---
layout: post
title: 'Where do coronaviruses come from?'
categories: science; biology; virology; coronavirus; politics

---

With limited options of leisure, I wrote this text on the current coronavirus pandemy.
I'm just organizing ideas here, and I recommend you to just read the linked articles at the bottom of the page.


# The Pandemy

So, by today we are a few months inside the coronavirus epidemic, which started 
in the last months of 2019. The epicenter was the chinese city of Wuhan,
where several cases started appearing in late november, then spread across the globe
most likely thru Wuhan's airport. The responsible is SARS-CoV-2, a coronavirus
considered to have originated from the horseshoe bat. Coronaviruses causes
disease across the globe, already, probably since the dawn of humanity, but
they never raised much concern since the usual major symptom in humans is a runny nose.
The infection by new virus strain, however, can cause lung failure which may send you
straight to intensive care and may cause death, especially in the elder and immunocompromised.


# Lab Leak?

In a few kilometers (3h25m hike, according to google maps) from the Wuhan Seafood market sits the Wuhan Institute of Virology,
which includes the first Biosafety level 4 laboratory in China, Its operation started in 2015.
BL-4 labs deal with pathogens that may cause death, and their extensive safety protocols includes the
use of a pressurized suit that resembles space gear.

Of course, the lab's proximity with the said source of the epidemy raised
all sorts of conspiracy theories. Rumours said China was just developing bioweapons
and due to a lapse in the safety systems, it was released right into the seafood market.
Altough the chief researcher of the lab says the leak scenario is not ruled out
this should pure insanity, there is no evidence of the leak. Or there is?


# An old tale

A study published in 2015 [1] described a new spike protein detected in bat coronaviruses
capable of recognizing human cell receptors very well, which in the case of this group of coronavirus the ACE2.
Altough bat strains are not capable of infecting humans, bats may display ACE2 or analogs that are compatible with human receptors.
Nonetheless, the group of researchers patched up together a chimeric
virus made from that spike protein with a human coronvirus backbone just to prove the point. 
How ironic... of course it raised a lot of backlash virologists at that time, who were
concerned about the safety of making dangerous viruses in the lab, but the chimera was built and the
it was very capable of infecting human cells, as predicted.
The main objective of the paper was to demonstrate how iminent epidemy featuring 
that spike protein was, and maybe if more effort was put into deveoping vaccines since
that day the situation wouldn't escalate to what we are living now.

SARS-CoV-2 is equivalent to what was built in the 2015 study: the highly effective S protein coupled
with a backbone capable of infecting humans.
Conspiration theories arose, but it was shown that SARS-CoV-2 differs from that chimeric virus in more than 5k
bases of RNA, so they cannot be the same virus.
Important to note, altough the 2015 chimera was developed in California,
one of the coauthors is from the Wuhan Institute of Virology.
Also, a lot of research conducted in WIV is about CoVs, following the SARS epidemy that happened in 2003-2004.


# Genetics alone won't tell

Aiming to debunk conspirationists of coronavirus as PRC's bioweapon,
a paper was written in march 2020 to show there is no evidence of genetic manipulation
in SARS-CoV-2's genome [2], by looking at the virus genomic features.
But the two main arguments presented here are not that definitive.


1. SARS-CoV-2 does not show a known backbone for genetic engineering of coronaviruses, so it is probably not made by humans.
2. The mutation patterns do resemble what was observed in this type of virus, in natura.

Both arguments seem rather weak. The Wuhan Virology Institute is a laboratory controlled by the PRC, and share knowledge with all researches in China.
It is very possible they develop certain techiniques that are not revealled to the world, such as backbones for virus engineering.
Also, it is very possible to do a simulation of natural evolution after you make a genome do what you want altough this
process is largely undocumented, just theoretically possible. Maybe this practice is widespread in bioweapon design?
Because nowadays any infectious disease will have their pathogenic agents sequenced and analyzed by researchers all around the world.
There is a tiny but interesting bit of evidence of this evolutionary make up, as the SARS-CoV-2 appears to have accumulated a ratio
of non-synonymous by synonymous mutations that is too low compared to what is observed in similar viruses [3].




It is complicated to trace such practices by looking at genomics alone, 
as there is no fundamental biological fingerprint of a modified genome,
such as unavoidable DNA motifs that happen only in genetically modified organisms due to the process itself.
There are only investigated assumptions.




# Stealth Bioweapon?

Another recent study shows that about half of the hosts of CoV-2 are asymptomatic[4].
This was known since months ago but now they have robust data to back it up.
Previous SARS pandemics were easily contained, but those diseases didn't show this stealthy, gamechanging trait.
Of course it makes much more difficult to isolate patients from the rest of the population, which is required
to stop the virus from circulating. In this case, the only resort seems a global lockdown as most countries are doing.
The impact in the economy of this idle period, in what they call the 'second wave' will be brutal.
In a few months for now, the world may see mass unemployment, riots, psychological disease due to stress, and so on... this may last for a long time.

Another group of researchers pointed that if the virus was purposely built as a bioweapon, it would
be designed in a manner to have a perfect binding to human receptors, maximizing virulency.
Decade long in-silico studies with the S protein revealed mutation configurations that would bind better to human cells than
SARS-CoV-2's S protein, and that would be a proof that it was not purposely built.
Again, wouldn't it make very obvious that it was human designed? It could have been made not so efficient to hide the effort, 
or maybe to avoid uncontrollable dispersion in the human population.
SARS-CoV-2's binding affinity to human cells is 10x higher than SARS-CoV-1's, 
which is the most impactiful morphologic difference between the two agents to the jump in virulence we are observing
between the outbreaks of 2003/2004 and today's.


The Bioweapon tale is still a conspiracy theory, as there is no concrete proof.
But even if it is not a bioweapon, it might be acting as on, since the global lockdown
just to avoid the overcrowd of hospitals are as impactiful as any weapon could be.
Several countries tried to build bioweapons. Then a few years later they quit, citing it was not cost-effective.
Maybe they were with the 'wrong' mindset? Anthrax, a famous bioweapon, can kill people exposed to it very quickly along with ebola which was also tried.
It is unknown which types of modifications those natural pathogens suffered to be used as weapons, if any. This is probably classified information 
from the involved governments.
SARS-CoV-2, instead, although highly infectious, will lead to critical cases with deaths in only a small portion of the population.
This would make it a less obvious bioweapon, while retaining destructive force against countries due to economic impact.




# The problem with China

With high populational density and questionable eating habitis, this country suffers from odd diseases such 
as the current bulbonic plague due to rabbit meat consumption [5].
Sometimes such diseases step up into local epidemies or global pandemies.
They are free to pursue any lifestyle they want, except when it affects the rest of the world in such manner.
It is rather ironic the country, with their own epidemy-prone environment that leads to a set of protocols
on how to act and contain an epidemy will suffer less than most contries the virus reached, whose are comparatively unprepared
to deal with such issues. Will every country be required to have the same anti-epidemic infra structure to contain pathogens thei did not 
'incubate'? Is China (or any other country that exports epidemies due to poor practices) morally obligued to help its neighbours with such cases?
The PRC also seem to disregard copyright laws, CO2 emission levels and worker rights, some intervention needs to be done.







# References

[1] [A SARS-like cluster of circulating bat coronaviruses shows potential for human emergence.](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26552008)
[2] [The proximal origin of SARS-CoV-2](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41591-020-0820-9)
[3] [Comparative genomic analysis revealed specific mutation pattern between human
coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 and Bat-SARSr-CoV RaTG13](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.02.27.969006v1.full.pdf)
[4] [Asymptomatic and Presymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 Infections in Residents of a Long-Term Care Skilled Nursing Facility](https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/69/wr/mm6913e1.htm)
[5] [China records third case of deadly bulbonic plague](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2019/nov/18/china-records-third-case-of-deadly-bubonic-plague)
